it happened long long ago and far
far away from our planet all the way
across the universe
a powerful burst of gamma radiation
lasted a mere half second
but it released an enormous amount of
energy
it was more than our sun would produce
in 10 billion years
this brief flash lit up the whole sky
afterward
a much softer and more long-lasting glow
replaced it
watching this fading light astronomers
on earth
noticed a strange infrared signal it was
invisible to the human eye
but could be perceived as heat
after examining the phenomenon with
x-ray radio
optical and infrared waves the
astrophysics team
made a shocking conclusion it seemed
that people had finally seen
a newborn magnetar for the first time
ever this magnetar was likely formed
after two neutron stars had merged it
resulted
in a kilanova one of the brightest and
largest stellar blasts
its light finally reached our planet on
may 22nd
2020. but i'm getting ahead of myself
how about we first figure out what these
novas
magnetars and neutron stars are
imagine a massive star at least five
times the mass of our sun
reaching the end of its life it might be
because
it's run out of nuclear fuel if it
happens
the star starts to cool off the pressure
inside drops
and the gravity starts to squeeze inward
and then
more than a million times the mass of
our planet collapses within 15 seconds
it happens so fast that an enormous
shock wave causes the outer part of the
star
to blow up it produces a blinding burst
of light
this powerful blast is called a
supernova
what's left behind is an incredibly
dense core
with a huge cloud of hot gas called a
nebula
expanding around it if the star has been
massive enough
more than 10 times the size of the sun
it's likely
to turn into a black hole
by the way when a star similar in size
to our sun
runs out of its fuel it turns into a
white dwarf
it expels most of its outer material and
only the star's
hot core remains intact such a core
usually gets heated up to 180 000
degrees fahrenheit
a white dwarf is just a bit bigger than
our planet
but half as massive as the sun in other
words
these stars are some of the densest
objects in the universe
a white dwarf can be 200 000 times
denser than the earth
it usually takes a white dwarf over a
billion years to cool down
under certain conditions such a star can
erupt
and this event is called anova it's way
less bright than a supernova
or even a kilanova which occurs when two
neutron stars
or a neutron star in a black hole merge
into each other
anyway back to a supernova if a star's
large
but not massive enough to turn into a
black hole it turns
into a neutron star it's basically a
giant nucleus
the central part of an atom
these stars are mostly made up of
neutrons and are rarely larger than 20
miles across
for comparison our sun is almost 865
000 miles across which is 109 earths put
side to side but don't let this
relatively tiny size fool you
any neutron star is at least one and a
half times heavier than our sun
and has an intense magnetic field if you
scooped just a teaspoon
of this star's insides this matter would
weigh
more than a billion tons that's so dense
that it makes neutron stars some of the
most extreme objects people know about
the next stop is the black hole itself
when two neutron stars merge they most
often
create a new much heavier one within
milliseconds or even less
this star collapses into a black hole
but the astronomers who examined the
flash of light recorded in march
think there might be another outcome
they're almost sure
they saw something never observed before
the birth
of a magnetar that's an exotic form of a
neutron star
with an ultra strong magnetic field it's
1 000
trillion times stronger than our planets
this field
is also so powerful it heats the star's
surface
up to 18 million degrees fahrenheit
neutron stars are weird and scary
their interior is a never ending dance
of particles in extreme conditions
it results in unexpected and odd
structures
for example closer to the surface
hundreds of neutrons form blobs
those are not unlike some weird kind of
space gnocchi
they mold into long chains once you go
deeper
not that you'd ever be able to explore a
neutron star from up close
these long chains look like a layer of
spaghetti
underneath there's a region of even more
extreme pressures
that's where our spaghetti turns into
lasagna sheets
since we've started on this pasta
comparison
finally under all these layers even
lasagna
loses its form and becomes a shapeless
mass
but even in this mass there are some
tube shaped gaps
and don't they look like ziti
another thing about neutron stars
they're spinning
non-stop and this spinning is fast
more than several hundred times per
second the fastest spinning neutron star
makes more than 700 turns per second
that's 42
000 times per minute neutron stars also
have incredibly strong magnetic fields
that's why if there was life on a
neutron star it would be
two-dimensional the star's gravity is so
powerful
it literally flattened anything on its
surface
and if such a star had an atmosphere it
wouldn't spread up further than a foot
or so above the surface
but if neutron stars are bizarre and
spooky
magnetars are too perhaps even more so
thanks to their incredible magnetic pull
these stars
would win in the strongest magnetic
field competition
hands down to put it simply magnetars
are the most powerful magnets in the
universe
their magnetic fields can seriously mess
with the neighborhood
atoms unlucky enough to get close to
such a star
get stretched into pencil-thin lines if
you somehow found yourself several
hundred miles away from a magnetar
it would end badly for you
[Music]
the magnetic field would first disrupt
your bioelectricity
it means that your nerve impulses
wouldn't work anymore
but that's not all even your molecules
would change under the influence of the
star's field
in the end you'd kind of vanish
if a magnetar flew within 100 000 miles
from our planet
it'd wipe out the data on every single
credit card in the world
astronomers have seen magnetars before
but they've never witnessed
one getting born after the light was
first detected
scientists understood something didn't
add up
they compared different kinds of
observations it turned out
that the light spotted by the hubble
space telescope was 10 times brighter
than predicted this information
made the scientists think outside the
box
they realized an entirely new phenomenon
was going on
the team had several ideas that could
explain the bizarre brightness
but the most probable one was also the
most eccentric
before scientists thought magnetars only
appeared after massive stars exploded
and left behind super magnetized neutron
stars
but now they suppose a small number of
magnetars
may actually appear in a more peaceful
way after two neutron stars merge
scientists only know about no more than
10 magnetars in our home milky way
galaxy
they don't know for sure what makes
these stars so terrifyingly magnetic
whatever it is magnetars don't seem to
last long
after 10 000 years or so they return to
a more familiar neutron star state
they're still extremely magnetic super
dense
but not so extreme
the closest magnetar people know about
is 9
000 light years away from earth in the
constellation
karina astronomers think the original
star
was 30 to 40 times the mass of the sun
which is a really big one
another magnetar is 18 000 light years
away from our planet
it suddenly started to burst in 2002
around 80 bursts were recorded within a
four
hour window after that the magnetar
has never been active again
by the way the researchers were also
immensely excited about seeing
a kilanova it occurred when the two
neutron stars
supposedly merged a kilanova
is more than one thousand times brighter
than a typical nova
before astronomers had only one
confirmed and examined event
of the kind but the kilonova recorded in
march
looked different and it might allow
scientists to explore the diversity
they knew nothing about